Tonight, the Pentagon is ordering two
American carrier strike groups to remain
in the region after a major flare up
of strikes between Israel and Hezbollah.
Here to help me break it
all down is retired U.S.
Air Force Colonel Cedric Leighton.
So let's start with this order
for the Pentagon to have these carrier
strike groups remain in place.
What is the significance of this?
It's huge, actually, Paula,
because when you look at this part
of the Middle East
and you see Israel here in Lebanon, here
the eastern Mediterranean
is a perfect jumping off
point for the US to exercise
some degree of influence.
But more importantly,
it also, these carrier strike groups
also allow the US to collect intelligence
in this area.
They can provide
tactical intelligence to the Israelis
so that the Israelis better defend
themselves through the Iron Dome system
and other systems that they have to
protect themselves from a missile attack
or any other kind of rocket attack.
Now, we saw attacks coming from
both Israel and Hezbollah.
Talk about the significance
about this exchange.
So when you have this is very interesting
because you had Israel,
of course, doing
preemptive actions in Lebanon.
So they would be attacking
areas in the south right along here.
This is where Hezbollah is concentrated.
So what the Israelis did was
they made a preemptive strike
against all of these areas.
They employed over 100 aircraft,
and these aircraft would go in and attack
these areas.
One of the types of aircraft
that they used was this F-35.
They used this along with several other
aircraft, including F-16s, aerial
refueling, to actually conduct operations
in this area.
Now, what was important here
was they struck these areas first.
But what Hezbollah was doing
once the Israelis attacked
Hezbollah, attacked targets
or tried to attack targets in Israel.
Now, they weren't able to actually strike
many of the targets in Israel.
And what they were able to do with the
Israelis were able to do was
they were able to intercept almost
all of the missiles that were coming in
that were going to strike certain military
targets or certain civilian areas.
And that was a key
element in what what the Israelis
were able to do in this particular case.
Another key question here.
What is the possibility
of a possible response from Iran?
Well, that is something
that is actually quite possible
because, Hezbollah,
this is Lebanon right here,
is of course, concentrated right here,
but they are a proxy for Iran.
Iran has this vast land area right here.
But we'll remember back in April,
they used over 300 missiles
and rockets and drones to attack
Israel, basically about a thousand miles
from the Iranian border to Israel.
And they were able to do this.
But all of this was intercepted through
the Iron Dome system that the Israelis
had. And the Iron Dome system
is designed to detect incoming,
missiles, rockets,
drones and really find out where they are.
They kind of have algorithms that predict
exactly where these rockets might strike.
they assess
whether or not that's going to happen.
And when they intercept
this using the Tamir missile, for example,
they will hit the missile, right where,
at this point,
but they won't hit it directly.
What they'll do is
dismissal will blow up in the proximity
of the incoming projectile,
and it will actually take things out.
So when the Iranians,
did this, this strike
back in April,
they loved a lot of stuff in Israel.
but because of the Iron Dome and U.S.
intelligence and radar activity,
and allied activity,
they were able to keep all of these,
the Iranian, efforts, really?
They held them at bay and made the Iranian
strike ineffective at that point.
What are you watching for
over the next 48 hours?
So over the next 48 hours,
one of the key things to look for is
what happens next with Hezbollah.
They're going to be operating
still in this area.
Are they going to use some of the missiles
that they have in the
in the northern area of, of Lebanon,
right in this area right here?
this area is an area where they store
some of their intermediate range missiles.
they could launch some of those
just from a tactical military perspective.
but the other thing is
what is happening in the peace talks
which are happening here in Cairo,
are they going to
the ones that are affecting these,
the peace talks affecting Gaza?
Are they going to have any impact on what,
Hezbollah does,
but broadening this out to the region?
what is Iran going to do
if Hezbollah is satisfied?
Iran might be satisfied,
at least in the short term.
And if the peace talks, actually
bear fruit, Iran might
hold their fire for a while and might not
be acting in an offensive fashion.
but that remains to be seen
whether or not they actually do that.